README.md, before:

Interactive Web Applications - Continuous Assessment 1

Module Learning Outcomes Assessed
MLO2 Develop the needs of a web application and implement an intuitive and user-centric interface design that can be applied to web applications to develop customizable user interfaces.
MLO3 Implement the requirements of an interactive web application solution taking into account the framework, user interface and storage needs.
MLO6 Design embeddable services that can integrate simple web applications into hosted web services.
MLO7 Assess the security needs of a web application to aid the development and integration of security measures.
Assignment Description
Choose an area of your interest to design, create and deploy an interactive web app that incorporates: [30%] Structured data stored in XML and/or JSON formats, where these files can be validated
(XSD/JSON Schema) and transformed to HTML for client-side consumption.
[30%] Retrieval and manipulation of this data on a server-side with Node.js and through the use
of appropriate modules.
[20%] Clean, intuitive and responsive user interface (Bootstrap) and appropriate visual
representation of the data on the client-side (CSS, JavaScript).
[10%] Security measures, such as validation of user input on the client-side (JavaScript) and
sanitisation of user input on the client-side (Node.js).
[10%] The finished application should be accompanied by a report (5 pages max) that outlines the idea behind your application, describes each of the technologies used and includes a short user manual (10%). The cover sheet for the report should include a full student name, student number, project title and the project’s GitHub repository link.
 
Interactive Web Applications
Additional Information
• This project is an individual project and you have all the freedom to work on a topic of your
interest.
• The application should be developed using an online IDE, such as Gitpod.io (the free tier includes 100 hours a month for developing/debugging/running you app), and all of your code from day one should be stored in your personal GitHub repository that is traceable, i.e. shows an adequate number of commits that go back to the very start of your project.
• All of the code and the report will be checked for plagiarism, so make sure everything is referenced through the use of comments. The code that is not referenced properly will not be marked and will be reported for plagiarism.
• Outside of special circumstances, any code submitted to GitHub after the deadline – will not be marked.
• Any other technical details that might come up during the course of this project should be clarified directly with your lecturer.
• A grading rubric for each of the grade items is outlined below. Please use this as a guide for the development of this project.

Commit message:

My report included as README.md

README.md, after:

# My Library
My Library is an web application to keep track of all physical books I have on my shelf at home. Reading and buying new books are my two favourite hobbies, therefore someday the number of books I own will be greater than I can keep in my head. My books.json file was created based on a spreadsheet I have been building since 2013, it contains relevant book information plus the year it was read. Only for this application I added a Favourite field to show even further information regarding only my favourite books.
## Technology
There are several ways to develop an interactive web application, but I have chosen the following technologies:
- Framework: Express;
- Data format: JSON;
- Templating: EJS;
- Security: Express-validator, NoSave;
- Styling: MaterializeCSS;

The Express framework is built using Node.js. It allows an easy and flexible way to create a backend application that works as a server. It offers features that handle HTTP requests, manage page routes and render HTML files. JSON - JavaScript Object Notation, nowadays it is one of the most used data format to exchange data between a browser and a server, I wanted to build an up to date application by using the easiest and latest technology presented in the market. To render the books.json file into an web page it was used EJS, which is a templating language that converts plain JavaScript into a readable HTML. For security measures it was used Express-validator and NoSave in the backend for sanitation and validation. For the frontend, the HTML pattern and required fields were used, plus the JavaScript given by the Materialize framework.
For deep understating of how this web app works it is required to explain what each file is doing. The core file is the app.js, it works as the server and handles all the GET and POST request from the user. It also redirects the user to the web page based on the URL entered, each page requires a different route. The app.js is also doing the sanitisation and validation in the backend. Books.json is where My Library’s data is stored. It has an array of JSON objects(books), each book contains at least six elements: Title, Subtitle, Author, Publisher, Year (Date when it was published) and YearRead (When it was read). For some books, it was added a seventh item.

## Functionalities 
##### CRUD - CREATE, READ, UPDATE AND DELETE

My Library application is able to handle the full CRUD functionality. The user can add new books, update all the existing ones and also delete them. In the page Update My Library, it is just needed to click on any item, this action opens up a dropdown section that contains a form. In this form, two of the CRUD functionality is presented. Update and Delete.

Creating a new JSON object and adding it to the array books is also possible, it can be done on the Register A New Book page. Like the Update My Library it has input validation. If the user enter a input which does not match with the pattern given, the form is not submitted and an error message is displayed. If the user has already read the book that is being added, there is a checkbox that when checked opens a new text field. If all the inputs match with the requirements, the form is submitted and a second validation and sanitisation in the backend is done.


### Displaying the Data
Favourite Books reads in all the books.json file, but by using an IF statement it only displays books that contains the Favourite json element. It uses Materialize Image Card, which is an standard card with an image thumbnail to display the content. The More Info link sends the user to an Wikipedia Page referent to the book.
My Library is the main page of the web application, it contains the whole collection of books that shows relevant information about each book. It also shows which book has been read with a tick on the righthand side. For the small thumbnail I have tried to use Google Books API to make it different for each book, but unfortunately Google has a limit of requests per minute.
